			Translation Graphs
		   by Tom Veatch, 2003, 2008, 2017-18

-------------------------------------------------------------------
	       	           Introduction
-------------------------------------------------------------------

TGML is a markup language for Translation Graphs.  A Translation Graph
represents a single language event or document in its multiple
translations, forms, layers, levels, segmentations, etc.  For example,
a Prakrit Buddhist text, with sentence-by-sentence English
translations, could be represented with three levels: 1) the
unsegmented original, 2) the sentence-by-sentence segmented original,
and 3) the sentence-by-sentence translated version.  The levels share
an abstract, consistent, partial ordering, but possibly no other data,
though they correspond with one another.  The correspondences are
defined by sharing boundaries across levels in the internal
segmentation of each level.

The TGML concept enables multiple-file representation of TGs such that
data of any type representing segments may be aligned together as they
correspond with one another sequentially in a document.

Segmentation and grouping are defined by nodes and arcs in a simple,
DAG ("directed acyclic graph", ignore this name if it is puzzling), or
lattice, or tiered structure with arcs for content and nodes,
optionally shared across tiers, representing alignment.  By definition
start/end nodes are required to be shared across all tiers.  Each
tier's arc contents are of a single type of data or translation.  No
tier need be more privileged than another.  TGs are typically works in
progress, as there are as many different translations, renderings,
commentaries, and analyses for any linguistic form as the mind of a
linguist can conceive.  Believe me, that is infinite.  Arcs of a
single tier together form a single pass through the entire document
and represent a single type of data.

Examples of the type of data within a given tier might be: original
images of palm leaf sheets, or, OCR-generated word hypotheses, or,
manually corrected phonetic transcription of a certain actor's verbal
rendering, or, a segment of a video (defined by data type,
time-stamps, perhaps player or other information), or, an audio
recording of one of a thousand instances of the word "OK", by a
study's many speakers in various natural contexts of occurrence.
